Training and Finetuning Reranker Models with Sentence Transformers v4 (#2768)
huggingface/blog: train-reranker.md

## Table of Contents

- [What are Reranker models?](#what-are-reranker-models)
- [Why Finetune?](#why-finetune)
- [Training Components](#training-components)
- [Dataset](#dataset)
  * [Data on the Hugging Face Hub](#data-on-the-hugging-face-hub)
  * [Local Data (CSV, JSON, Parquet, Arrow, SQL)](#local-data-csv-json-parquet-arrow-sql)
  * [Local Data that requires pre-processing](#local-data-that-requires-pre-processing)
  * [Dataset Format](#dataset-format)
  * [Hard Negatives Mining](#hard-negatives-mining)
- [Loss Function](#loss-function)
- [Training Arguments](#training-arguments)
- [Evaluator](#evaluator)
  * [EmbeddingSimilarityEvaluator with STSb](#embeddingsimilarityevaluator-with-stsb)
  * [CrossEncoderRerankingEvaluator with GooAQ mined negatives](#crossencoderrerankingevaluator-with-gooaq-mined-negatives)
- [Trainer](#trainer)
  * [Callbacks](#callbacks)
  * [Multi-Dataset Training](#multi-dataset-training)
- [Training Tips](#training-tips)
<!-- - [Deprecation](#deprecation) -->
- [Evaluation](#evaluation)
- [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)
  * [Training Examples](#training-examples)
  * [Documentation](#documentation)

## What are Reranker models?

> Reranker models, often implemented using Cross Encoder architectures, are designed to evaluate the relevance between pairs of texts (e.g., a query and a document, or two sentences). Unlike Sentence Transformer (a.k.a. bi-encoders, embedding models), which independently embed each text into vectors and compute similarity via a distance metric, Cross Encoder process the paired texts together through a shared neural network, resulting in one output score. By letting the two texts attend to each other, Cross Encoder models can reach stronger performance than embedding models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reranker models, often implemented using Cross Encoder architectures, are designed to evaluate the relevance between pairs of texts (e.g., a query and a document, or two sentences). Unlike Sentence Transformer (a.k.a. bi-encoders, embedding models), which independently embed each text into vectors and compute similarity via a distance metric, Cross Encoder process the paired texts together through a shared neural network, resulting in one output score. By letting the two texts attend to each other, Cross Encoder models can perform better than embedding models.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Reranker models, often implemented using Cross Encoder architectures, are designed to evaluate the relevance between pairs of texts (e.g., a query and a document, or two sentences). Unlike Sentence Transformer (a.k.a. bi-encoders, embedding models), which independently embed each text into vectors and compute similarity via a distance metric, Cross Encoder process the paired texts together through a shared neural network, resulting in one output score. By letting the two texts attend to each other, Cross Encoder models can outperform embedding models.
```

I think this might be even stronger?

> However, this strength comes with a trade-off: Cross Encoder models are slower as they process every possible pair of texts (e.g., 10 queries with 500 candidate documents requires 5,000 computations instead of 510 for embedding models). This makes them less efficient for large-scale initial retrieval but ideal for reranking: refining the top-k results first identified by faster Sentence Transformer models. This 2-stage "retrieve and rerank" approach is commonly used in the strongest search systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this strength comes with a trade-off: Cross Encoder models are slower as they process every possible pair of texts (e.g., 10 queries with 500 candidate documents requires 5,000 computations instead of 510 for embedding models). This makes them less efficient for large-scale initial retrieval but ideal for reranking: refining the top-k results first identified by faster Sentence Transformer models. The strongest search systems commonly use this 2-stage "retrieve and rerank" approach.
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph RM[Reranker Model]
    direction TB
    C["Input Pair: <br>(Text A, Text B)"] -->|predict| D["Similarity Score<br>(e.g., 0–1 relevance)"]
    end

    subgraph EM[Embedding Model]
    direction TB
    A[Input: Text A] -->|encode| E[Embedding A]
    B[Input: Text B] -->|encode| F[Embedding B]
    G[Calculate Similarity] -->|e.g. cosine similarity| H["Similarity Score <br>(e.g., 0–1 relevance)"]
    E --> G
    F --> G
    end

    style EM fill:#cce5ff,stroke:#555,stroke-width:2px
    style RM fill:#ffe6cc,stroke:#555,stroke-width:2px
```

Throughout this blogpost, I'll use "reranker model" and "Cross Encoder model" interchangeably.

## Why Finetune?

Reranker models are often tasked with a challenging problem: 
> Which of these $k$ highly-related documents answers the query the best?

> General-purpose reranker models are trained to perform adequately on this exact question in a wide range of domains and topics, preventing it from reaching its maximum potential on your specific domain. Through finetuning, the model can learn to focus exclusively on the domain and/or language that matters for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
General-purpose reranker models are trained to perform adequately on this exact question in a wide range of domains and topics, preventing it from reaching its maximum potential in your specific domain. Through finetuning, the model can learn to focus exclusively on the domain and/or language that matters to you.
```

<!--
Note, -\-> is just to allow the comment
```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph RM[Reranker Model]
    direction TB
    C["Input Pair: <br>(Text A, Text B)"] -\->|predict| D["Similarity Score<br>(e.g., 0–1 relevance)"]
    end

    subgraph EM[Embedding Model]
    direction TB
    A[Input: Text A] -\->|encode| E[Embedding A]
    B[Input: Text B] -\->|encode| F[Embedding B]
    G[Calculate Similarity] -\->|e.g. cosine similarity| H["Similarity Score <br>(e.g., 0–1 relevance)"]
    E -\-> G
    F -\-> G
    end

    style EM fill:#cce5ff,stroke:#555,stroke-width:2px
    style RM fill:#ffe6cc,stroke:#555,stroke-width:2px
```
-->

![Embedding vs Reranker Models](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/train-reranker/embedding_vs_reranker_model.png)

Throughout this blogpost, I'll use "reranker model" and "Cross Encoder model" interchangeably.

## Why Finetune?

Reranker models are often tasked with a challenging problem: 

> > Which of these $k$ highly-related documents answers the query the best?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Which of these \\(k\\) highly-related documents answers the query the best?
```

Assuming you intended a LaTeX-style rendering.

Author: I did! I wasn't aware of this notation, thanks!

> General-purpose reranker models are trained to perform adequately on this exact question in a wide range of domains and topics, preventing it from reaching its maximum potential in your specific domain. Through finetuning, the model can learn to focus exclusively on the domain and/or language that matters to you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
General-purpose reranker models are trained to perform adequately on this exact question in a wide range of domains and topics, preventing them from reaching their maximum potential in your specific domain. Through finetuning, the model can learn to focus exclusively on the domain and/or language that matters to you.
```

Additionally, if your dataset has extraneous columns (e.g. sample_id, metadata, source, type), you should remove these with [`Dataset.remove_columns`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/main/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.remove_columns) as they will be used as inputs otherwise. You can also use [`Dataset.select_columns`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/main/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.select_columns) to keep only the desired columns.

### Hard Negatives Mining

The success of training reranker models often depends on the quality of the *negatives*, i.e. the passages for which the query-negative score should be low. Negatives can be divided into two types:

* **Soft negatives**: passages that are completely unrelated. Also called easy negatives.

> * **Hard negatives**: passages that seem like they might be relevant for the query, but are not.

Reviewer 2: Interesting, I thought it was the other way around ("hard" negative sounds _more_ negative).

Author: It's a bit of a tricky definition, hence the examples. "hard negative" means "hard for a model to see as a negative". 

One of the original formal definitions actually says that a "hard negative" is any negative that is deemed more similar to an anchor (e.g. query) than the positive, but there's a very blurry line between "hard negative" and "positive".

A concise example is:
* **Query**: Where was Apple founded?
* **Soft Negative**: The Cache River Bridge is a Parker pony truss that spans the Cache River between Walnut Ridge and Paragould, Arkansas.
* **Hard Negative**: The Fuji apple is an apple cultivar developed in the late 1930s, and brought to market in 1962.

> The strongest CrossEncoder models are generally trained to recognize hard negatives, and so it's valuable to be able to "mine" hard negatives. Sentence Transformers supports a strong [`mine_hard_negatives`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/util.html#sentence_transformers.util.mine_hard_negatives) function that can assist, given a dataset of query-answer pairs:

Author: ```suggestion
The strongest CrossEncoder models are generally trained to recognize hard negatives, and so it's valuable to be able to "mine" hard negatives to train the with. Sentence Transformers supports a strong [`mine_hard_negatives`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/util.html#sentence_transformers.util.mine_hard_negatives) function that can assist, given a dataset of query-answer pairs:
```
Your proposal has a different meaning than my intention, so that tells me that my original text wasn't clear enough.

> The strongest CrossEncoder models are generally trained to recognize hard negatives, and so it's valuable to be able to "mine" hard negatives. Sentence Transformers supports a strong [`mine_hard_negatives`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/util.html#sentence_transformers.util.mine_hard_negatives) function that can assist, given a dataset of query-answer pairs:

Reviewer 2: ah I see what you meant, sorry!

> The strongest CrossEncoder models are generally trained to recognize hard negatives, and so it's valuable to be able to "mine" hard negatives. Sentence Transformers supports a strong [`mine_hard_negatives`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/util.html#sentence_transformers.util.mine_hard_negatives) function that can assist, given a dataset of query-answer pairs:

Author: No need to apologize! It's very useful to show me that the original intention was not clear 🤗

```python
from datasets import load_dataset
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
from sentence_transformers.util import mine_hard_negatives

# Load the GooAQ dataset: https://huggingface.co/datasets/sentence-transformers/gooaq

> train_dataset = load_dataset("sentence-transformers/gooaq", split=f"train").select(range(100_000))

Reviewer 2: Why not `load_dataset("sentence-transformers/gooaq", split="train[:100000")`

Author: ```suggestion
train_dataset = load_dataset("sentence-transformers/gooaq", split="train").select(range(100_000))
```
Because I people to be familiarized with `select(range(...))`, as that is useful outside of just `load_dataset`, e.g. also when you're using `Dataset.from_dict`, `Dataset.from_list`, etc. I think I actually used `f"train[:{max_length}]"` in my own script, that's why the `f` was still there.

Also, I'm pretty sure that `train[:100000]` still downloads the full dataset and only afterwards does the slicing.

        }
        for sample in hard_eval_dataset
    ],
    batch_size=32,
    name="gooaq-dev",
)
# You can run evaluation like so
results = reranking_evaluator(model)
"""
CrossEncoderRerankingEvaluator: Evaluating the model on the gooaq-dev dataset:
Queries:  1000     Positives: Min 1.0, Mean 1.0, Max 1.0   Negatives: Min 49.0, Mean 49.1, Max 50.0
          Base  -> Reranked
MAP:      53.28 -> 67.28
MRR@10:   52.40 -> 66.65
NDCG@10:  59.12 -> 71.35
"""
# {'gooaq-dev_map': 0.6728370126462222, 'gooaq-dev_mrr@10': 0.6665190476190477, 'gooaq-dev_ndcg@10': 0.7135068904582963, 'gooaq-dev_base_map': 0.5327714512001362, 'gooaq-dev_base_mrr@10': 0.5239674603174603, 'gooaq-dev_base_ndcg@10': 0.5912299141913905}
```

## Trainer

The [`CrossEncoderTrainer`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/cross_encoder/trainer.html#sentence_transformers.trainer.CrossEncoderTrainer) is where all previous components come together. We only have to specify the trainer with the model, training arguments (optional), training dataset, evaluation dataset (optional), loss function, evaluator (optional) and we can start training. Let’s have a look at a script where all of these components come together:

> ```python

Reviewer 2: I realize this script is important, but it's a bit long, I wonder if it should still be inside a `details` section?

Author: I've also been thinking about this, I'll do some brainstorming what I prefer.

Author: My preference is to keep the script to try and help familiarize potential users with the code structure. I care more about trying to get people to make their own models than to focus on the 2 models that I trained for the blogpost, and I think having the code (hopefully) helps with that.

        run_name=run_name,  # Will be used in W&B if `wandb` is installed
        seed=12,
    )

    # 6. Create the trainer & start training
    trainer = CrossEncoderTrainer(
        model=model,
        args=args,
        train_dataset=hard_train_dataset,
        loss=loss,
        evaluator=evaluator,
    )
    trainer.train()

    # 7. Evaluate the final model, useful to include these in the model card
    evaluator(model)

    # 8. Save the final model
    final_output_dir = f"models/{run_name}/final"
    model.save_pretrained(final_output_dir)

    # 9. (Optional) save the model to the Hugging Face Hub!
    # It is recommended to run `huggingface-cli login` to log into your Hugging Face account first
    try:
        model.push_to_hub(run_name)
    except Exception:
        logging.error(
            f"Error uploading model to the Hugging Face Hub:\n{traceback.format_exc()}To upload it manually, you can run "
            f"`huggingface-cli login`, followed by loading the model using `model = CrossEncoder({final_output_dir!r})` "
            f"and saving it using `model.push_to_hub('{run_name}')`."
        )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

> In this example I'm finetuning from [`answerdotai/ModernBERT-base`](https://huggingface.co/answerdotai/ModernBERT-base), a base model that is not yet a Cross Encoder model. This generally requires more training data than finetuning an existing reranker model like [`Alibaba-NLP/gte-multilingual-reranker-base`](https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/gte-multilingual-reranker-base). I'm using 99k query-answer pairs from the [GooAQ dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/sentence-transformers/gooaq), after which I mine hard negatives using the [sentence-transformers/static-retrieval-mrl-en-v1](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/static-retrieval-mrl-en-v1) embedding model. This results in 578k labeled pairs, i.e. 99k positive pairs (i.e. label=1) and 479k negative pairs (i.e. label=0).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example I'm finetuning from [`answerdotai/ModernBERT-base`](https://huggingface.co/answerdotai/ModernBERT-base), a base model that is not yet a Cross Encoder model. This generally requires more training data than finetuning an existing reranker model like [`Alibaba-NLP/gte-multilingual-reranker-base`](https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/gte-multilingual-reranker-base). I'm using 99k query-answer pairs from the [GooAQ dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/sentence-transformers/gooaq), after which I mine hard negatives using the [sentence-transformers/static-retrieval-mrl-en-v1](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/static-retrieval-mrl-en-v1) embedding model. This results in 578k labeled pairs: 99k positive pairs (i.e. label=1) and 479k negative pairs (i.e. label=0).
```

> I use the `BinaryCrossEntropyLoss`, which is well suited for these labeled pairs. I also set up 2 forms of evaluation: `CrossEncoderNanoBEIREvaluator` which evaluates against the NanoBEIR benchmark and `CrossEncoderRerankingEvaluator` which evaluates the performance of reranking the top 30 results from the aforementioned static embedding model. Afterwards, I defined a fairly standard set of hyperparameters, including learning rates, warmup ratios, bf16, loading the best model at the end, and some debugging parameters. Lastly, I run the trainer, perform post-training evaluation, and save the model both locally and on the Hugging Face Hub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I use the `BinaryCrossEntropyLoss`, which is well suited for these labeled pairs. I also set up 2 forms of evaluation: `CrossEncoderNanoBEIREvaluator` which evaluates against the NanoBEIR benchmark and `CrossEncoderRerankingEvaluator` which evaluates the performance of reranking the top 30 results from the aforementioned static embedding model. Afterwards, I define a fairly standard set of hyperparameters, including learning rates, warmup ratios, bf16, loading the best model at the end, and some debugging parameters. Lastly, I run the trainer, perform post-training evaluation, and save the model both locally and on the Hugging Face Hub.
```
